writing/thesis.md, before:

# After Class: Bringing Social to Massive Open Online Courses

Reed La Botz

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign


## Background

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are the latest incarnation of free, open public education which use the power of the internet to deliver educational content to audiences around the world. All MOOCs share two important common traits, they must have open access, meaning not only free, but also without limitations on location or organizational affiliation, and they must be scalable, meaning they can easily accommodate tens or hundreds of thousands of users (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massive_open_online_course). These traits often also lead to content being highly structured, and the courses relying heavily on a strong community of students to ask and answer questions in the online forums or Q&A systems. 

One of the earliest MOOC-like systems was iTunes U which offers recordings of courses taught at Universities or other educational institutions. This system currently has over 350,000 videos in its library. Khan Academy is another service that was an early MOOC system, offering 3500 micro lectures directed primarily at grade school children.

In the last year three different websites have begun to offer MOOCs, both Udacity and Coursera began offering courses in April 2012 and now have one million and 750,000 members respectively. One key difference in the two sites is that Udacity courses are taught by people as individuals, while Coursera courses are offered as part of a partnership with universities. A third similar website, edX, has popped up in Fall 2012 as a partnership between MIT and Harvard to offer MOOCs. 

Although MOOCs began in technical areas, they have now spread to many different areas of study including statistics, chemistry, poetry, and many other liberal arts topics. These non-technical topics have created extra challenges in requiring human grading of written homework responses.


## Motivation

Social interaction plays a large role in the current on campus educational system. Many of the most important lessons and discussions happen outside of class in coffee shops, office hours, and dorm rooms. Similar interactions could play an important role in online courses as well giving students a sense of community, a chance to form meaningful study groups or groups for projects, and allow for other social interactions that lead to a better learning experience. One aspect of social interaction that becomes especially important in online courses is the sense of community that it offers, allowing students to realize they are not alone in the class, and therefore have an outlet to discuss problems or lack of understanding with other students.


## Existing Solutions

All MOOC systems have created some system for allowing students to interact amongst themselves or with course staff. Both Udacity and Coursera have Q&A style forums that allow students to ask questions and vote on the best answer, this system however limits the amount of discussion that can happen on a topic. For some of the more discussion based courses in the humanities, Coursera has set up live webcasts of panel discussions on topics several times throughout the course. These discussions are moderated and often allow students to either submit questions electronically or wait in a queue to have a chance to join the webcast. 

Coursera has additionally teamed up with the website MeetUp which allows students to organize in-person meetups with groups in cities across the world. This system does allow for some face-to-face social interaction, but the MeetUp site only has a group for Coursera students, not individual courses, leaving students on their own to find a group that will share similar interests. Moreover these meeting are to occur in person limiting the availability only to those living in larger cities.


## Collaboration Ready

In order for groups to be successful, it is important to ensure that the members of the group are prepared to collaborate well together.


## Toward a Social MOOC

After Class is an organized system that helps students enrolled in massive online classes find other students and student groups to socialize with. 


### Getting user information

In order to help facilitate group formation students must fill out a short survey when they first sign up for the service. The first section of the survey asks about personal and demographic information. This information will allow students to better filter potential study-buddies based on who they believe they will work best with. 

![Personal and demographic information screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/welcome-step-1.png)

One of the great features of a MOOC is the flexibility it offers to fit in to busy schedules and allow students from anywhere in the world to take the course, this does however mean that students enrolled in the same class might have drastically different schedules. To account for this students are also asked to select times when they are generally available from a week calendar. During the group finding process only those students that share one or more available blocks in common will be recommended to become study buddies.
 
![Availability screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/welcome-step-2.png)

One students have completed the personal information and availability surveys they are asked to add all of the massive online courses they are enrolled in. When adding each course they are asked about their background and reasons for taking the course. We ask both about their experience in the general area of study and the specific topic to better understand their level with the material of the course. All questions are phrased in such a way that they can apply to any area of study that might be available through on of the online course providers. 

![Add course screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/add-course.png)


### Helping users find groups

The most important aspect of this service is the ability for students to find other students that will be good partners for them. To help in this process we show users a graph in the explore section that shows how similar to themselves other students are. This allows students to look for other students that they think will be a good fit or them, be it someone who is very similar or someone who is a polar opposite.

![Explore screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/explore.png)


### Interacting with a circle


### Future features

Although the main focus of this project is to find groups for online interaction, the same system could also assist students to find groups for in person meet-ups. This has the benefit over the current solution offered by MOOC providers of having all the meta data about students in the class allowing people to only join meet-ups which will be productive.


## Future Research

The next step in this project will be to get a field trial with real students. To be able to test the efficacy of the system in finding productive groups students would need to be asked an extra survey about their previous experience in MOOCs as well as surveys about how much they enjoy the meetings they have with their groups, and if the groups added to their enjoyment or learning in the course.

Commit message:

Add small section about request approval

writing/thesis.md, after:

# After Class: Bringing Social to Massive Open Online Courses

Reed La Botz

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign


## Background

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are the latest incarnation of free, open public education which use the power of the internet to deliver educational content to audiences around the world. All MOOCs share two important common traits, they must have open access, meaning not only free, but also without limitations on location or organizational affiliation, and they must be scalable, meaning they can easily accommodate tens or hundreds of thousands of users (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massive_open_online_course). These traits often also lead to content being highly structured, and the courses relying heavily on a strong community of students to ask and answer questions in the online forums or Q&A systems. 

One of the earliest MOOC-like systems was iTunes U which offers recordings of courses taught at Universities or other educational institutions. This system currently has over 350,000 videos in its library. Khan Academy is another service that was an early MOOC system, offering 3500 micro lectures directed primarily at grade school children.

In the last year three different websites have begun to offer MOOCs, both Udacity and Coursera began offering courses in April 2012 and now have one million and 750,000 members respectively. One key difference in the two sites is that Udacity courses are taught by people as individuals, while Coursera courses are offered as part of a partnership with universities. A third similar website, edX, has popped up in Fall 2012 as a partnership between MIT and Harvard to offer MOOCs. 

Although MOOCs began in technical areas, they have now spread to many different areas of study including statistics, chemistry, poetry, and many other liberal arts topics. These non-technical topics have created extra challenges in requiring human grading of written homework responses.


## Motivation

Social interaction plays a large role in the current on campus educational system. Many of the most important lessons and discussions happen outside of class in coffee shops, office hours, and dorm rooms. Similar interactions could play an important role in online courses as well giving students a sense of community, a chance to form meaningful study groups or groups for projects, and allow for other social interactions that lead to a better learning experience. One aspect of social interaction that becomes especially important in online courses is the sense of community that it offers, allowing students to realize they are not alone in the class, and therefore have an outlet to discuss problems or lack of understanding with other students.


## Existing Solutions

All MOOC systems have created some system for allowing students to interact amongst themselves or with course staff. Both Udacity and Coursera have Q&A style forums that allow students to ask questions and vote on the best answer, this system however limits the amount of discussion that can happen on a topic. For some of the more discussion based courses in the humanities, Coursera has set up live webcasts of panel discussions on topics several times throughout the course. These discussions are moderated and often allow students to either submit questions electronically or wait in a queue to have a chance to join the webcast. 

Coursera has additionally teamed up with the website MeetUp which allows students to organize in-person meetups with groups in cities across the world. This system does allow for some face-to-face social interaction, but the MeetUp site only has a group for Coursera students, not individual courses, leaving students on their own to find a group that will share similar interests. Moreover these meeting are to occur in person limiting the availability only to those living in larger cities.


## Collaboration Ready

In order for groups to be successful, it is important to ensure that the members of the group are prepared to collaborate well together.


## Toward a Social MOOC

After Class is an organized system that helps students enrolled in massive online classes find other students and student groups to socialize with. 


### Getting user information

In order to help facilitate group formation students must fill out a short survey when they first sign up for the service. The first section of the survey asks about personal and demographic information. This information will allow students to better filter potential study-buddies based on who they believe they will work best with. 

![Personal and demographic information screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/welcome-step-1.png)

One of the great features of a MOOC is the flexibility it offers to fit in to busy schedules and allow students from anywhere in the world to take the course, this does however mean that students enrolled in the same class might have drastically different schedules. To account for this students are also asked to select times when they are generally available from a week calendar. During the group finding process only those students that share one or more available blocks in common will be recommended to become study buddies.
 
![Availability screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/welcome-step-2.png)

One students have completed the personal information and availability surveys they are asked to add all of the massive online courses they are enrolled in. When adding each course they are asked about their background and reasons for taking the course. We ask both about their experience in the general area of study and the specific topic to better understand their level with the material of the course. All questions are phrased in such a way that they can apply to any area of study that might be available through on of the online course providers. 

![Add course screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/add-course.png)


### Helping users find groups

The most important aspect of this service is the ability for students to find other students that will be good partners for them. To help in this process we show users a graph in the explore section that shows how similar to themselves other students are. This allows students to look for other students that they think will be a good fit or them, be it someone who is very similar or someone who is a polar opposite.

![Explore screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/explore.png)

One a user sends a partner request the requested user is notified and asked to accept or reject the request based on the same user information provided in the explore screen. During the request process the personal information of neither party is given to the other until both have approved the group.

![Explore screen](https://raw.github.com/reedlabotz/AfterClass/master/writing/screenshots/partner-request.png)


### Interacting with a circle


### Future features

Although the main focus of this project is to find groups for online interaction, the same system could also assist students to find groups for in person meet-ups. This has the benefit over the current solution offered by MOOC providers of having all the meta data about students in the class allowing people to only join meet-ups which will be productive.


## Future Research

The next step in this project will be to get a field trial with real students. To be able to test the efficacy of the system in finding productive groups students would need to be asked an extra survey about their previous experience in MOOCs as well as surveys about how much they enjoy the meetings they have with their groups, and if the groups added to their enjoyment or learning in the course.
